Add Decision Transformers Blogpost (#250)
huggingface/blog: decision-transformers.md

---
title: "Introducing Decision Transformers on Hugging Face 🤗"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/58_decision-transformers/thumbnail.png
---

> 

Reviewer: Some of the assets are huge (>1MB), which will be a slow experience for people in many countries or costly for phone users. Could we compress the assets?

Author: Done

        <div class="bfc">
            <code>edbeeching</code>
            <span class="fullname">Edward Beeching</span>
        </div>
    </a>
    <a href="/ThomasSimonini"> 
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://aeiljuispo.cloudimg.io/v7/https://s3.amazonaws.com/moonup/production/uploads/1632748593235-60cae820b1c79a3e4b436664.jpeg?w=200&h=200&f=face" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>ThomasSimonini</code>
            <span class="fullname">Thomas Simonini</span>
        </div>
    </a>
</div>

At Hugging Face, we are contributing to the ecosystem for Deep Reinforcement Learning researchers and enthusiasts. Recently, we have integrated Deep RL frameworks such as [Stable-Baselines3](https://github.com/DLR-RM/stable-baselines3). 

And today we are happy to announce that we integrated the [Decision Transformer](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.01345), an Offline Reinforcement Learning method, into the 🤗 transformers library and the Hugging Face Hub. We have some exciting plans for improving accessibility in the field of Deep RL and we are looking forward to sharing them with you over the coming weeks and months.

> 

Reviewer: I think a table of content could be super useful, since people that know about RL will want to skip the first few sections

Author: Done thanks

## What is Offline Reinforcement Learning?

Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a framework to build decision-making agents. These agents aim to learn optimal behavior (policy) by interacting with the environment through trial and error and receiving rewards as unique feedback.

The agent’s goal is to maximize **its cumulative reward, called return.** Because RL is based on the reward hypothesis: **all goals can be described as the maximization of the expected cumulative reward.**

Deep Reinforcement Learning agents **learn with batches of experience.** The question is, how do they collect it?:

![Offline vs Online RL](assets/58_decision-transformers/offlinevsonlinerl.gif)

> *A comparison between Reinforcement Learning in an Online and Offline setting, figure taken from [2].*

Reviewer: Maybe add a link in [2], since this is not a paper we can have things a bit more direct

On the other hand, in offline reinforcement learning, the agent only uses data collected from other agents or human demonstrations. **It does not interact with the environment**.

The process is as follows:

1. Create a dataset using one or more policies and/or human interactions.
2. Run offline RL on this dataset to learn a policy

This method has one drawback: the counterfactual queries problem. What do we do if our agent decides to do something for which we don’t have the data? For instance, turning right on an intersection but we don’t have this trajectory. 

There’s already exists some solutions on this topic, but if you want to know more about offline reinforcement learning you can watch [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k08N5a0gG0A)

## Introducing Decision Transformers

The Decision Transformer model was introduced by [“Decision Transformer: Reinforcement Learning via Sequence Modeling” by Chen L. et al](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.01345). It abstracts Reinforcement Learning as a **conditional-sequence modeling problem**.

> The main idea is that instead of training a policy using RL methods (fit a value function or compute a policy gradient) that will tell us what action to take to maximize the return (cumulative reward). We use a sequence modeling algorithm (Transformer) that, given a desired return, past states, and actions, will generate future actions to achieve this desired return. It’s an autoregressive model conditioned on the desired return, past states, and actions to generate future actions that achieve the desired return.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main idea is that instead of training a policy using RL methods, such as fitting a value function, that will tell us what action to take to maximize the return (cumulative reward), we use a sequence modeling algorithm (Transformer) that, given a desired return, past states, and actions, will generate future actions to achieve this desired return. It’s an autoregressive model conditioned on the desired return, past states, and actions to generate future actions that achieve the desired return.
```

This is a complete shift in the Reinforcement Learning paradigm since we use generative trajectory modeling (modeling the joint distribution of the sequence of states, actions, and rewards) to replace conventional RL algorithms. It means that in Decision Transformers, we don’t maximize the return but rather generate a series of future actions that achieve the desired return.

The process goes this way:

1. We feed the last K timesteps into the Decision Transformer with 3 inputs:
    - Return-to-go
    - State
    - Action
2. The tokens are embedded either with a linear layer if the state is a vector or CNN encoder if it’s frames.
3. The inputs are processed by a GPT-2 model which predicts future actions via autoregressive modeling.

![Decision Transformers architecture](assets/58_decision-transformers/dt-architecture.gif)
*Decision Transformer architecture. States, actions, and returns are fed into modalityspecific linear embeddings and a positional episodic timestep encoding is added. Tokens are fed into a GPT architecture which predicts actions autoregressively using a causal self-attention mask. Figure from [1].*

## Using the Decision Transformer in 🤗 Transformers

> The Decision Transformer model is now available as part of the 🤗 transformers library. In addition, we share nine pre-trained model checkpoints for continuous control tasks in the Gym environment.

Reviewer: Should there be a link to the 9 checkpoints?

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
    <video 
        alt="WalkerEd-expert"
        style="max-width: 70%; margin: auto;"
        autoplay loop autobuffer muted playsinline
    >
      <source src="assets/58_decision-transformers/walker2d-expert.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
</figure>
*An “expert” Decision Transformers model, learned using offline RL in the Gym Walker2d environment.*

### Loading the model

> Using the Decision Transformer is relatively easy, but as it is an autoregressive model, some care has to be taken in order to prepare the model’s inputs at each time-step. We have prepared both a [Python script](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/main/examples/research_projects/decision_transformer/run_decision_transformer.py) and a [Colab notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1K3UuajwoPY1MzRKNkONNRS3gS5DxZ-qF?usp=sharing) that demonstrates how to use this model.

Reviewer: The colab can be submitted to GH as well and it's easy to share (replace drive with github), and it will be easier to find.

Loading a pretrained Decision Transformer is simple in the 🤗 transformers library:
`````python
from transformers import DecisionTransformerModel

model_name = "edbeeching/decision-transformer-gym-hopper-expert"
model = DecisionTransformerModel.from_pretrained(model_name)

> model.eval()

Reviewer 2: Ah thanks, I didn't know.

> model.eval()

Reviewer 3: might want to check it's been a long time i've committed to `transformers` =)

``````
### Creating the environment

We provide pretrained checkpoints for the Gym Hopper, Walker2D and Halfcheetah. Checkpoints for Atari environments will soon be available.
`````python
import gym
env = gym.make("Hopper-v3")
state_dim = env.observation_space.shape[0] # state size
act_dim = env.action_space.shape[0] # action size
``````
### Autoregressive prediction function

The model performs an [autoregressive prediction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autoregressive_model); that is to say that predictions made at the current time-step **t** are sequentially conditioned on the outputs from previous time-steps. This function is quite meaty, so we will aim to explain it in the comments.

`````python
# Function that gets an action from the model using autoregressive prediction 
# with a window of the previous 20 timesteps.
def get_action(model, states, actions, rewards, returns_to_go, timesteps):
    # This implementation does not condition on past rewards

    states = states.reshape(1, -1, model.config.state_dim)
    actions = actions.reshape(1, -1, model.config.act_dim)
    returns_to_go = returns_to_go.reshape(1, -1, 1)
    timesteps = timesteps.reshape(1, -1)

> 		# The prediction is conditioned on up to 20 previous time-steps

Reviewer: indentation seems strange here

    actions = actions[:, -model.config.max_length :]
    returns_to_go = returns_to_go[:, -model.config.max_length :]
    timesteps = timesteps[:, -model.config.max_length :]
    
    # pad all tokens to sequence length, this is required if we process batches
		padding = model.config.max_length - states.shape[1]
    attention_mask = torch.cat([torch.zeros(padding), torch.ones(states.shape[1])])
    attention_mask = attention_mask.to(dtype=torch.long).reshape(1, -1)
    states = torch.cat([torch.zeros((1, padding, state_dim)), states], dim=1).float()
    actions = torch.cat([torch.zeros((1, padding, act_dim)), actions], dim=1).float()
    returns_to_go = torch.cat([torch.zeros((1, padding, 1)), returns_to_go], dim=1).float()
    timesteps = torch.cat([torch.zeros((1, padding), dtype=torch.long), timesteps], dim=1)

		# perform the prediction
    state_preds, action_preds, return_preds = model(
        states=states,
        actions=actions,
        rewards=rewards,
        returns_to_go=returns_to_go,
        timesteps=timesteps,
        attention_mask=attention_mask,
        return_dict=False,
    )

    return action_preds[0, -1]
``````
### Evaluating the model

> In order to evaluate the model, we need some additional information; the mean and standard deviation of the states that were used during training. Fortunately, these are available for each of the checkpoint’s [model card](https://huggingface.co/edbeeching/decision-transformer-gym-hopper-expert) on the 🤗 Hub! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to evaluate the model, we need some additional information; the mean and standard deviation of the states that were used during training. Fortunately, these are available for each of the checkpoint’s [model card](https://huggingface.co/edbeeching/decision-transformer-gym-hopper-expert) on the Hugging Face Hub! 
```

> In order to evaluate the model, we need some additional information; the mean and standard deviation of the states that were used during training. Fortunately, these are available for each of the checkpoint’s [model card](https://huggingface.co/edbeeching/decision-transformer-gym-hopper-expert) on the 🤗 Hub! 

Reviewer: As a suggestion, instead of having this in the model card, I think information needed for a model to work should be in a file such as `config.json`

Author: @edbeeching next version.

> We also need a target return for the model, this is the power of Offline Reinforcement Learning, we can use the target return to control the performance of the policy. This could be really powerful in a multiplayer setting, where we would like to adjust the performance of an opponent bot to be at a suitable difficulty for the player. The authors show a great plot of this in their paper!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also need a target return for the model. This is the power of Offline Reinforcement Learning: we can use the target return to control the performance of the policy. This could be really powerful in a multiplayer setting, where we would like to adjust the performance of an opponent bot to be at a suitable difficulty for the player. The authors show a great plot of this in their paper!
```

``````python
TARGET_RETURN = 3.6 # This was normalized during training
MAX_EPISODE_LENGTH = 1000 

state_mean = np.array(
    [1.3490015,  -0.11208222, -0.5506444,  -0.13188992, -0.00378754,  2.6071432,
     0.02322114, -0.01626922, -0.06840388, -0.05183131,  0.04272673,])

state_std = np.array(
    [0.15980862, 0.0446214,  0.14307782, 0.17629202, 0.5912333,  0.5899924,
		 1.5405099,  0.8152689,  2.0173461,  2.4107876,  5.8440027,])

state_mean = torch.from_numpy(state_mean)
state_std = torch.from_numpy(state_std)

state = env.reset()
target_return = torch.tensor(TARGET_RETURN).float().reshape(1, 1)
states = torch.from_numpy(state).reshape(1, state_dim).float()
actions = torch.zeros((0, act_dim)).float()
rewards = torch.zeros(0).float()
timesteps = torch.tensor(0).reshape(1, 1).long()

# take steps in the environment
for t in range(max_ep_len):
    # add zeros for actions as input for the current time-step
    actions = torch.cat([actions, torch.zeros((1, act_dim))], dim=0)
    rewards = torch.cat([rewards, torch.zeros(1)])

		# prediction the action to take
    action = get_action(
        model,
        (states - state_mean) / state_std,
        actions,
        rewards,

>         target_return,

Reviewer 3: indentation seems a bit broken here (mixed spaces and tabs maybe?)

Author: Done

        timesteps,
    )
    actions[-1] = action
    action = action.detach().numpy()

		# interact with the environment based on this action
    state, reward, done, _ = env.step(action)

    cur_state = torch.from_numpy(state).reshape(1, state_dim)
    states = torch.cat([states, cur_state], dim=0)
    rewards[-1] = reward

    pred_return = target_return[0, -1] - (reward / scale)
    target_return = torch.cat([target_return, pred_return.reshape(1, 1)], dim=1)
    timesteps = torch.cat([timesteps, torch.ones((1, 1)).long() * (t + 1)], dim=1)

    if done:
        break
``````
You will find a more detailed example, with the creation of videos of the agent in our [Colab notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1K3UuajwoPY1MzRKNkONNRS3gS5DxZ-qF?usp=sharing).

## Conclusion

> The integration of the Decision Transformer model is just the start of our expansion into the field of Deep Reinforcement Learning. It would be great to hear your feedback on the Decision Transformer model. Feel free to **[reach out to us](mailto:thomas.simonini@huggingface.co)**. 

Reviewer 3: "our expansion into the field of Deep Reinforcement Learning" sounds a little bit off – maybe something more community-centric, like:

> We want to support more use cases and tools from the Deep Reinforcement Learning community. It would be great to hear your feedback on the Decision Transformer model, and more generally anything we can build with you that would be useful for RL.

WDYT @osanseviero?

Reviewer: Yes, strong agree

## What’s next?

> In the coming weeks and months, we will be extending the ecosystem by:

Reviewer 3: maybe?
```suggestion
In the coming weeks and months, we plan on supporting other tools from the ecosystem:
```

- Integrating **[RL-baselines3-zoo](https://github.com/DLR-RM/rl-baselines3-zoo)**

> - Uploading **[RL-trained-agents models](https://github.com/DLR-RM/rl-trained-agents/tree/master)** into the Hub: a big collection of pre-trained Reinforcement Learning agents using stable-baselines3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Uploading **[RL-trained-agents models](https://github.com/DLR-RM/rl-trained-agents)** into the Hub: a big collection of pre-trained Reinforcement Learning agents using stable-baselines3
```
